
                                                                 APPENDIX 6
                                                                 19 April 1988
                           Omega Navigation System

Circuit Breakers Required

Flight Deck

     Copilot's Upper CB Panel both on Main AC Bus Panel
     28V DC ESS BUS 3A marked "Omega DC" - powers C12 Compass No 1 Power Amp.
     115V 400Hz A Phase ESS BUS 3A marked "Omega AC" - powers RPU, Blower and
     CDU edge lights.

     Pilot's Upper CB Panel on MRF LH AC BUS Panel
     115V 400Hz B Phase 3A marked "TAS TRANS" (bracketed with "INERTIAL NAV")
     - powers True Airspeed input.

MRF Van
          On JB4A 28V DC Maintained Supply 10A marked "DORIS & SIMON" - powers
     Synchro Box and Simon Box.

Power

     Receiver Processor Unit (RPU)  62 Watts
     Control Display Unit (CDU)     24 Watts
     Antenna Coupler Unit (ACU)      1 Watt

     Synchro Box Omega Interface Boards less than 2 Watts.

Principles of Operation

The Litton 211 Omega Navigation System was fitted to XV208 in 1984 as part of
the Hercules fleet update.  The fit consists of an Aerial under the tail fin,
a RPU under the flight deck floor and a CDU at the Navigator's station.  Our
installation is as near to standard as possible but with the addition of a
True Airspeed Unit (TAS).

Omega is a ground-based radio navigation system giving world wide coverage
using the VLF band (10-14kHz).  The signal travels in a "waveguide" formed by
the earth and the ionosphere.  Position is derived by measuring the signal's
phase.  The Litton 211 uses direct ranging (rho-rho) techniques.  The RPU
computer allows for diurnal effect, ground conductivity, the earth's geometry
and magnetic field, and latitude effect.

The 7 ground stations (10kW output power) are controlled by atomic clocks and
broadcast on 4 common frequencies plus 1 unique frequency in their own
10 second transmission pattern enabling automatic identification and
synchronism.  The receiver selects the 3 stations with the best Signal/Noise
ratio and compares the received phases to an internal reference oscillator
which has been aligned with the ground station's clocks on initialisation. 
Changes in phase are converted to distance flown.




                                        -1-


                                                                 APPENDIX 6
                                                                 19 April 1988

Initial inputs required are Present Position (Lat/Long) and Date/GMT. 
Subsequent position calculations are improved by aircraft heading (Magnetic
Compass) and TAS inputs.  The Lat/Long are updated every 1.2 seconds, other
parameters even less frequently (see Table B attached) as they are computed
from position information.

The relative accuracy of any Omega system is approximately 1nm by day, and 2nm
by night.

The firmware program (on 26.11.86) was 211-08-02.  Any change of program may
entail modification to the DRS Software.

Data to DRS

The data from the ONS were recorded on the DRS beginning Spring 1987.  The
parameters are shown in Table B (attached).

The ARINC 419 data stream from the RPU J1A pins 60 and 71 is carried on STP
via JB4B to the 4 boards forming the Omega Interface in Synchro Box (H006). 
The input is PL4 on H006 and the output is on PL1 to the SIMON Box (H438)
channel 9.

As the ONS data stream is non-repetitive each parameter label is checked and
recorded parameters are put in their proper position in a buffer on receipt of
a Word Valid pulse.  When SIMON requests a paremeter a NMI to the 6809 CPU
causes the data in the RAM buffer to be transferred via the ASMA card to SIMON
and then to DORIS.

Pre Flight

Switch on and initialisation is done by the aircrew.  The interface is
switched on with the DRS.  The ONS may revert to Dead Reckoning (DR) condition
during power change-over.

In Flight

Omega values may be checked against DRS values using Table 5.

After Flight

The Omega is switched off by the Navigator on reaching the park position.  The
interface is switched off with the DRS.

Testing

A JcAIR "429" hand-held battery-powered ARINC 429 Transmitter/Receiver able to
test both ends of the system is available in MRF Electronics Section.





                                        -2-

                                                                      
