Particle Soot Absorption Photometer                                 Appendix_04
                                                                    AUGUST 1996
Circuit Breakers required
        JB3B    "EPDB Control"
 
        EPDB 12  230VAC panel     CB19, 200V, 400Hz, 3ph
                                  28VDC  Input switch  (green light)
                                  230V   Output switch (amber light)
                                  CB13, 230V
        115V,    1ph panel        CB7, 115V, 400Hz
 
Herc Rack 5
        230V  Distribution box    PSAP switch ON (underside)

 
Background

Aerosol particles emitted from combustion sources contain many different
carbonaceous compounds and structures.  One of these components is carbon in a
microcrystalline graphitic form, which, due to its strong optical absorption,
is termed "black carbon".  This material can only be produced by incomplete
combustion, there are no secondary mechanisms known for its production.  It is
also inert to transformation in the atmosphere and therefore possesses
qualities that make it a good tracer for combustion emissions.
 
Chemical techniques for the determination of the black carbon content of
aerosol samples collected on filters are generally complex and time consuming.
In contrast, optical measurements are often simple and rapid.
 
Since most ambient aerosols do not contain large amounts of other
noncarbonaceous absorbing particulate material, a measurement of optical
absorption of the filter deposit corresponds very closely to the black carbon
determination.


 
Principle of Operation

The PSAP operates on the principle of continuous measuring of the attenuation
of a beam of light transmitted through a filter, while the particle-laden air is
being drawn through the filter.  At a constant airstream velocity (approx 2
slpm), the rate of deposition of black carbon on the filter is proportional to
its concentration in the aerosol and gives a corresponding rate of increase of
optical attenuation.
 
Measurement of this last quantity constitutes the basis of this method.  The
aerosol particles are retained on the filter and are available for subsequent
analysis by other physical and chemical means.
 
A transparent mask with a 5mm diameter hole covers the quartz filter.  The air
flow is thus drawn through only a small part of the filter, on which the
particles are collected.  The remainder of the filter is used as a reference
for the optical measurement and as a blank for chemical analyses.
 
The filter is uniformly illuminated from above by an ultra-bright, green led
(wavelength=565nm).  Below the filter, a pair of matched photodetectors measure
the transmitted light through the signal and reference paths.

                                      -1-
                                                                     
Particle Soot Absorption Photometer                                 Appendix_04
                                                                    AUGUST 1996


Pre-flight

1.  Check that all CBs are made.

2.  Remove the filter, if fitted, and insert a new one in the holder.  Ensure
    that the filter is placed sample (ie. rough), side up, and that the o-rings
    are in position on the top half of the holder.

3.  Close and secure the holder.

4.  Switch the PSAP and the Pump Control Unit ON.  The signal level screen
    will show for about 10 seconds then the main screen will be displayed.

5.  Check the flow rate is approx. 2 lpm, adjust the front panel needle valve if
    necessary.

6.  Set the PSAP clock to DRS time.  Use the FUNCTION switch to select the
    time-set screen.  Time and date settings are changed with the ITEM switch. 
    "Up" (select), moves the cursor to the digit to be changed; "Down" (set),
    changes the value of that digit.

7.  The averaging period is normally set to 30s.  The first few averaging
    periods will be noisy until the filter position stabilises and the data
    registers get valid transmission measurements.  If a different averaging
    period is required, use the Function switch to step through the screens,
    and the Item switch to change the Sample period value.

8.  The "lvl" values shown on the main screen relate to the photodetector
    current and should be in the range 20 to 65.  If either is outside these
    limits, then use the Function switch to step through to the signal level
    screen.  The values shown on this screen are x 10,000.
    To change the values, use the Item switch.

9.  If a new filter was loaded, wait at least 1 averaging period then press and
    HOLD the "Reset" switch up until "Tr" on the display resets to 1.000.  The
    filter transmittance (Tr), value is used by the software to correct for
    filter loading as well as indicate when the filter should be changed.

10. Take a note of the pre-flight readings then switch the PCU and PSAP off (to
    avoid filling up the filter).












                                     -2-                        

Particle Soot Absorption Photometer                               Appendix_04
                                                                  August 1996

In-flight 

1.  Switch the PSAP and PCU on.

2.  The instrument will take about 15 minutes for its internal temperature to
    stabilise.

3.  If there are no specific requirements regarding changing the filter, then
    the default is to change it before the transmittance, Tr, falls to 0.5.
    (In most cases, one filter should last for the whole flight).

4.  Monitor and adjust the flow rate as required.  It is not crucial that the
    rate be exactly 2 lpm because the PSAP's software takes the flow rate into
    account in its calculations.

5.  The PSAP has 4 analogue outputs which are recorded by the DRS at 1Hz.

      DRS Para    Signal                          DRSU       Range
       185	  Linear Absorption coeff (Bap)   0->4095    0 -> 5E-5 /m
       186        Log Absorption coeff (Bap)      0->4095    1E-7 -> 1E-2 /m
       187	  Filter Transmittance (Tr)       0->4095    0 -> 1.25    
       188        Sample Flow Rate                0->4095    0 -> 5 lpm    

6.  The HORACE parameters are:- 554  PLIN   0 -> 5E-5 /m
                                555  PLOG   0 -> 4095 DRSU (not yet a log scale)
                                556  TRNS   0 -> 1.25 

7.  When flying through cloud / precipitation, it is best to switch the PCU
    off as the filter has been known to get wet in such conditions.  This
    can result in the filter becoming more transparent and the Transmittance
    value increasing.
    If this happens, remove and change the filter.  Then, after at least one
    averaging period, reset the Transmittance to 1.000.
    Note all of this down on the log sheet.

8.  On the return transit, or when the instrument is no longer required, switch
    the PSAP and PCU off.  Remove the filter.


After flight

1.  On HERC Rack 5, 230V Distribution box, switch PSAP OFF (underside).

2.  On JB12,  230V panel, pull CB 13, switch 230V and 28V OFF.
              115V panel, pull CB 7.










                                     -3-
